I used to deal craps. It's good money. Here is a basic understanding.

1. A game is about to start.

2. You put money on the pass line.

3. The first dice is rolled. Three things can happen.

You can Win (Roll a 7 & 11), Lose (2,3,12) or the game can start (Any other dice 
combo: 4,5,6,8,9,10).

4. In the event that you don't auto win or auto lose the game starts. Lets use a 
'6' as an example. You rolled a 6, so the game starts. The big button is placed 
on the six and it will read 'ON'

5. Now the rules change a bit. Only one number can hurt you and it's a 7. Every 
other number can be a winner in some way, especially the 6.

6. 7 is the most common number that can be rolled. In the event that a 7 is 
rolled again all the money gets wiped off the table. In the event that your 
number is rolled again (the 6), everybody wins.

You are basically saying this phrase when you play craps "I Bet I can roll a 
number, and I bet I can re-roll that same number, before a 7, which is the most 
common number, is rolled."

7. Now the FUN comes in with all the numbers in between. Lets focus on those big 
box numbers, 4,5,6,8,9,10. Lets assume that you've rolled a 6. The button is 'ON' 
the 6. The game has been established. Your ultimate goal is to roll a 6 again 
before you roll a 7. However, you can put money on the 4,5,8,9, & 10. In the 
event that those numbers come up during a roll, YOU WIN, in the event that those 
numbers do not come up: YOU DON'T LOSE. That is why people have so much fun with 
craps. You can throw a bet up on the '8'. As the game is going, if an 8 comes up, 
you get paid, if a 2,3,4,5,9,10,11, or 12 is rolled you don't lose your money. 
But every time the 8 is rolled you're going to get paid. You can put money on all 
those numbers. As often as they come up you get paid, you can even 'press' the 
bet, which means doubling your bet at any time.

8. So in our fictional game being played so far, the roller originally a rolled a 
6, and you have made am extra bet on an 8. Every time an 8 comes up you win 
extra, no other number hurts you (EXCEPT the 7). Your sitting at the table and 
the roller keeps rolling a 5 as well. You say shit, I'm gonna throw money up on 
the 5, and so now you have bets on the 5, 8, & don't forget our originally the 
number the 6: all of these are winners.

9. At this point let's look at the board. You have a bet placed on the 5, the 8, 
and the 6. the numbers 8 & 5 have come up a couple times now and you've made your 
money back. At any time you can pull your bets off the 5 and 8, (although most 
people never do). The 6 is locked in. You can't move it. WHY? Because that is the 
original bet of "I rolled a 6, I bet I can roll a 6 again before I roll the most 
common number, a 7." Following me so far? Shit I hope so I hope I'm not confusing 
you.

10. Okay, Let's end the game. There are two ways a round/game ends. The two 
numbers that can end a game. One is the original number that was rolled: (in our 
fictional game, that is a 6.) In the event that a 6 is rolled ALL the money on 
the pass line is paid (remember the pass line? Refer back up to #2. That is your 
original bet). You have successfully rolled a 6 again and so everyone gets paid on 
the pass line, and all that money out on the board is 'safe.' You can take it off 
if you want, or leave it there. It becomes inactive.

The bad way a game ends is if a 7 comes up while the game is 'ON.' In the event 
that a 7 comes up ALL the money is wiped off the table. Your pass line bet, the 
extra bet on the big box numbers, EVERYTHING. It's like the little mini-economy 
crashes.

11. That is the basics of the game. You are betting that any number you roll, 
you'll roll again before a 7. In between all that you can bet other numbers and 
as they come up you win, and you don't get hurt unless there is another 7 (Which 
is the most COMMON number you can roll).

12. Now what is all that other junk on the board? You see 'FIELD' and all that 
stuff in the middle: 5 for 1, 10 for 1, etc etc? Those are one time bets. 
Essentially if you bet the field it's a one time bet to say I bet a 
2,3,4,9,10,11, or 12 will be rolled. If it is, you win, if it's not, you lose. 
The middle section are called hard numbers. Hard numbers are like a hard 10: (Both 
dices roll 5, as apposed to a 6 & 4). These are all what I like to call Sucker 
bets They can be fun but they are generally ignored. Hard 2 (snake eyes, both 
dices roll 1) is not a great bet to continue to be betting.

Additional Point #12a:
The middle of the table also includes "proposition bets" like:
- Any 7 (pays 4:1)
- Any Craps (2,3,12 pays 7:1)
- Horn bet (2,3,11,12)
- Hardways (pairs like 4-4, 3-3, etc.)
These bets have higher payouts but much worse odds for the player.

13 Lets say you entered mid-game and want to play and get in on the action. That 
is where the 'Come' bet comes into play. COME bets work exactly like pass line bets, 
but you can make them after a point is established. If a 7 or 11 rolls, you win. If 
2,3,12 rolls, you lose. If any other number rolls, that becomes your "come point" and 
moves to that number. You win if your come point rolls before a 7.

14 Wow, you are doing so well. Hopefully you understand craps so far. Know this, 
any table you walk up to people will be glad to help. It's not like blackjack 
where people get pissed at you. Your bets don't affect other people (yet).

15 Now let me confuse the shit out of you. Something I've ignored so far, the 
Don't Pass bar. You can play the mirror opposite of this entire fucking game. Put 
money on the don't pass bar and now everything is reversed. I'm going to have to 
reboot, here we go:

1. Put money on don't pass. There are three things that can happen. You can 
either automatically win (by rolling a 2,3, or 12), or lose (by rolling a 7, or 
11) or the game can start by rolling a (4,5,6,8,9,10)

2. Lets say you rolled a 6. You essentially saying this "I bet the most common 
number a 7, will come out before a 6 is re-rolled." You're actually rooting for 
the 7 now, over the 6. In the mean time, all the other rules apply. You can bet 
the big box, and the game will still be over if a 6 or 7 is rolled, but you have 
bet reverse everybody else.

3 A warning: Betting reverse can be fun, but you can seriously piss off other 
people at the table. Why? Because you become that guy. The guy that as everyone 
else is loosing money, you cheer, or everyone else is saying 6! 6! you're saying 
7! 7!.

Shit. Hopefully i've done an OKAY job. you can make this game as hard or as 
simple as you'd like it to be. People get scared to actually play it but it's a 
lot of fun. As always, there is no winning strategy. If you could fairly win at 
craps it wouldn't be in a casino. There are better bets the others and people 
swear they learn to roll a dice a certain way, but from being on the table for 
much longer then most people (as a dealer) I can tell you it's a fun game, but 
it's still a casino game. Enjoy.

Additional Point #4a:
When a point number (4,5,6,8,9,10) is rolled and the button goes 'ON', this 
number becomes your "point". This is important because it's the number you're 
trying to roll again before rolling a 7.

Additional Point #7a:
Once a point is established, you can place "odds" behind your pass line bet. This 
is one of the best bets in the casino because it pays true odds:
- 2:1 on points of 4 or 10
- 3:2 on points of 5 or 9
- 6:5 on points of 6 or 8
Most casinos allow you to place odds of 3x, 5x, or even 10x your original pass 
line bet.

Additional Point #15a:
The best bets in craps (lowest house edge) are:
- Pass/Don't Pass (1.36%/1.4%)
- Come/Don't Come (same as Pass/Don't Pass)
- Taking Odds (0% house edge!)
- Place 6 or 8 (1.52%)
Avoid proposition bets which can have house edges of 10% or more.